 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO SOLAR SYSTEM 
 
GEY 101 
 
The Earth 
The earth has a radius of a little under 6400 km. The deepest hole that has yet been drilled in the 
crust of the earth has a depth of just over 12 km. The core of the earth is  at a temperature of over 
5000◦. A major source of the heat that maintains this high temperature is the decay of radioactive 
materials such as uranium in the earth’s core. 
 
 
Internal Structure of the Earth 
Crust:  
The outer parts of the earth can be divided into two types of crustal material: Continental crust and 
Oceanic crust. The continental crust can range from 20 to 70 km thick, and is composed largely of 
rocks with relatively high silica content. The oceanic c rust is thinner (typically around 10 km 
thick), and is composed of rock with lower silica content. 
Mantle 
We know little about the composition of the earth’s mantle, which extends from the crust to the 
outer core. Analysis of the speeds of seismic waves tr aveling through the mantle, along with the 

few samples geologists think represent mantle material, suggest that it is made up of rocks that are 
denser than those of the crust. 
 Lithosphere: the outer 100 km or so of the earth’s surface is composed of rocks that are 
rigid and strong, and thus not easily deformed. 
 Asthenosphere: in the region from about 100 km down to 350 km, the temperature and 
pressure the rocks are experiencing make them easily deformable (but not liquid.)  
 Mesosphere: as we move inward the  pressure increases, causing the rocks at depths 
between 350 and 2900 km to become strong and rigid again. 
Core  
The high density of the core, combined with the fact that iron is by far the most common heavy 
element in the universe suggests that the core of the earth is composed largely of iron. 
 Outer Core: in the outer core (at depths of 2900 km to 5140 km), the temperature becomes 
high enough for the material there to become molten (i.e. liquid). The “S wave shadow” is 
created by the outer, liquid core.  
 Inner Core: deeper in the core, the pressure continues to rise, increasing the melting point 
of the materials there until they exceed the temperature in that part of the core. The inner 
core of the earth is therefore solid, even though the outer core, that is at a lower temperature, 
is liquid. 
Earth’s Atmosphere 
Earth’s atmosphere is composed of nitrogen (78%), oxygen (21%), argon (1%), as well as various 
trace gases, such as carbon dioxide and water vapor. This is a strange composition for a planetary 
atmosphere, since oxygen will easily combine with other chemicals. The presence of an oxygen 
rich atmosphere is a due to the action of plant-life on the earth.  
Layers in the Atmosphere  
 Troposphere: the lowest 10 km or so of the earth’s atmosphere. The temperature drops 
steadily as you move upward in the troposphere, because convection is fairly strong in this 
layer.  
 Stratosphere: from approximately 10 to 30 km above the surface. The temperature 
changes very little with height, due to little convection occurring in this layer. 
 Mesosphere: from 30 to 80 km above the surface, the temperature actually rises, due to 
absorption of UV light by the ozone layer.   
 Ionosphere: Above about 100 km, some fracti on of the atmosphere is ionized (i.e. 
electrons are stripped from atoms or molecules), meaning that there are free positively and 
negatively charged particles in the atmosphere. The ions are produced by the atoms and 
molecules absorbing short wavelength UV and x-rays from the sun.  
 
 
The Greenhouse Effect 
 If Earth had no atmosphere, its surface temperature would be determined by the balance of the 
rate at which its surface absorbed solar radiation, and the rate it emitted radiation since any object 
with a te mperature above absolute zero will radiate. It turns out that the average surface 
temperature for the earth in this case would be below 0◦ C. Earth’s surface actual average surface 
temperature is above the freezing point of water because of the effect of i ts atmosphere, and is 
known as the greenhouse effect. The net effect of this process is that the surface and troposphere 
of the earth will contain more energy than they would in the absence of any atmosphere. This 
increased energy can take different forms,  including higher temperatures, increased amounts of 
water vapor in the atmosphere, etc. This is what people mean when they refer to the greenhouse 
effect, and is not synonymous with global warming, which is a change of average surface 
temperatures presumably induced by an increased efficiency of the greenhouse effect produced by 
increased concentrations of carbon dioxide in Earth’s atmosphere due to the burning of fossil fuels. 
The History of the Earth  
The evolutionary history of the earth can be divided into several distinct  
 Accretion (4.6-3.8 byrs ago): During this phase, the earth was being built up by collisions 
with smaller solar system bodies and was largely molten. The sinking of the more dense 
materials to form Earth’s core (differentiation) occurred during this period.  
 Continent growth (3.8-2.5 byrs ago) During this phase, the continents and ocean basins 
are formed, and the first life appears.  
 Continents Stabilize (2.5-0.6 byrs ago) Oxygen is released into earth’s atmosphere by 
early plants (remember, these plants were largely algae!)  
 Modern Tectonics  (0.6 byrs -present) Evolution of the surface is largely controlled by 
global tectonics, as well as the weathering influence of the atmosphere and liquid water 
Mars 
Mars has approximately  25 solar ho ur day and about 25◦ axial tilt, both close to the values for 
Earth. In addition, the surface conditions on Mars are the closest to those on Earth of any solar 
system body. The red or orange color of Mars is due to Iron Oxides in its soil. On occasion the 
surface will experience large dust storms, sometimes obscuring the entire surface of the planet for 
weeks at a time. One interesting feature of Mars is the fact that the two hemispheres of the planet 
are considerably different in their properties. The elevation of the southern hemisphere is roughly 
4 km higher than in the northern hemisphere, and the crater density is significantly higher in the 
south than the north. It has been variously suggested that perhaps a global flooding event or large 
impact may have created the asymmetry, but these are currently little more than speculations. 
 
 
Martian Atmosphere 
The Martian atmosphere is composed largely of carbon dioxide (95%), with a bit of nitrogen (3%). 
The final 2% of the atmosphere is composed of Argon and other trace gases. The density of the 
atmosphere at the surface of Mars is only about approximately 1% that on Earth. Although its 
atmosphere is composed largely of carbon dioxide, Mars does not exhibit a significant greenhouse 
effect because of the very low density of its atmosphere. 
Internal Structure of Mars 
The average density of Mars is 3.9 g/cm3. Because of the planets relatively low mass, the 
uncompressed density of Mars is about 3.8 g/cm3, somewhere between that of the earth and the 
Moon. Furthermore, Mars currently has no global magnetic field. From recent exploration on mars, 
the inferred internal structure of Mars is:  
 Lithosphere (crust + mantle) ∼ 2000 km thick.  
 Iron Core ∼ 1500 km in radius. 
There are many examples of local tectonics, the most impressive of which are associated with the 
the Tharsis bulge. Chief among these is the Valles Marineris, a 5000 km long canyon system that 
radiates away from the bulge. The Valles was not formed by erosive processes, as are many large 
canyons on the earth such as the Grand Canyon, but instead is due to fracturing of the crust by the 
bulge. Also, the Tharsis bulge is a site of several large shield volcanoes, the largest of which, 
Olympus Mons, is approximately 27 km (19 miles) high.  
 

Evidence of water on Mars 
One of the most evocative questions about Mars is whether Mars had liquid water on its surface in 
the past, and if so, how much water there was and where that water might be today. Evidence for 
liquid water in the past on Mars includes: 
 “Teardrop” craters, presumably formed by the flow of large amounts of water around the 
craters.  
 “Splat” craters, whose ejecta look similar to a mud -flow on Earth, suggesting that the 
impact melted subsurface ice, which mixed with the Martian soil to form the ejecta.  
 Runoff channels, similar to those created by rainfall on Earth. Unlike the channels on the 
earth, however, the systems of channels are much more widely spaced. This suggests that 
if they were formed by rainfall that areas where rain did fall were fairly localized. 
 Outflow channels, similar to channels created by large, catastrophic floods on the earth. 
 Polar Caps: The polar caps on Mars are also places that may harbor water ice. The caps 
actually grow and shrink with the Martian seasons. The seasonal caps are believed to be 
carbon dioxide ice (i.e. dry ice), that freezes out of the atmosphere during the winter, and 
sublimates back into the atmosphere in the summer 
Jupiter 
The basic properties of Jupiter are:  
 Mass 318 times the earth (1/1000th that of Sun)  
 Diameter 11 times the earth  
 Density 1.33 grams/cc  
 Rotation period 9.9 hours 
 
 
Jupiter’s Atmosphere 
The atmosphere of Jupiter is composed 99.9% of hydrogen and helium, with 75% hydrogen and 
25% helium present by mass. There are two obvious features in the atmosphere; the banded 
structure (known as belts and zones), and the great red spot. 
 Belts and Zones : There is strong convection in the outer atmosphere of Jupiter. This, 
combined with the rapid rotation of the planet produce the banded structures observed in 
Jupiter’s atmosphere. The Belts (darker colored bands) are areas where the atmosphere is 
descending, while the Zones (lighter colored bands) are places where the atmosphere is 
rising. The Belts are at somewhat higher temperatures than the Zones. 
 The Great Red Spot : Is a larg e rotating disturbance that has persisted for at least 300 
years. Its direction of rotation shows that the spot is a high pressure system. A second, 

smaller red spot has formed recently, out of the merger of two somewhat smaller 
disturbances known as white ovals. 
Internal structure of Jupiter 
Extracting structure information from a gas giant’s density is also more difficult, since gases are 
highly compressible and if compressed sufficiently can change state from a gas to a liquid. But 
with the help of the o bservation of the magnetic field of the planet, it was observed that Jupiter 
radiates roughly twice as much electromagnetic radiation as it absorbs from the Sun, indicating 
there must be a substantial interior heat source in the planet due to residual heat from its formation. 
The interior of Jupiter is observed to include; 
 Atmosphere The outer parts of Jupiter are gaseous. Calculations suggest that the 
atmosphere stays gaseous well below the layers we can directly observe. 
 Liquid Hydrogen The pressure increases as we move inward into Jupiter. Eventually, the 
pressure becomes high enough that the hydrogen goes from being a gas to a liquid. The 
change from gas to liquid is not abrupt, but instead takes place slowly as you move inward.  
 Liquid Metallic Hydrogen  When liquid hydrogen gets to high enough pressures, it 
becomes a good conductor of electricity. The pressures are high enough that a fairly 
extensive region in Jupiter’s interior is in this state. The liquid metallic hydrogen, along 
with the rapid rotation of the planet account for Jupiter’s strong magnetic field.  
 Rocky Core The structure indicate that there must be a solid core to Jupiter (about 15 times 
mass of the earth). 
Saturn  
The basic properties of Saturn are:  
 Mass 95 times Earth’s mass  
 Diameter 9.5 times Earth’s diameter  
 Density 0.69 grams/cc (less than water) 
 Rotation period 10.7 hours 
 
 
 
Saturn’s Interior 
Like Jupiter, the atmosphere of Saturn is composed 99.9% of hydrogen and helium. Unlike Jupiter, 
however, there is about 7 times as much hydrogen as helium by mass. This is due to condensation 
of liquid helium in the lower levels of the planet. Saturn has a lower temperature than Jupiter, so 
it possible for helium which condenses at a lower temperature than hydrogen to condense in Saturn. 
Similarly, the banding structure in Saturn’s atmosphere is much weaker (again, due to Saturn’s 
lower temperature), and there are no signs of strong, persistent cloud features. Saturn radiates 
approximately 3 times as much electromagnetic radiation as it absorbs from the Sun. Because it is 
only 1/3 the mass of Jupiter, Saturn released significantly less gravitational potential energy 
during. 
Because of its lower mass, the interior of Saturn suffers less compression than that of Jupiter. 
Saturn has a magnetic field, but it is much less strong than that of Jupiter. The interior structure of 
Saturn is observed to comprise of;  
 Atmosphere  
 Liquid Hydrogen  
 Liquid Metallic Hydrogen Because of Saturn’s lower mass, it has a much less extensive 
zone of liquid metallic hydrogen than Jupiter does.  
 Core Exploration indicate a core similar to that of Jupiter, somewhere in the range of 10 -
15 Earth masses. 
Uranus and Neptune 
The Basic properties of Uranus are:  
 Diameter 4.1 times that of Earth  

 Mass 14 times Earth  
 Density 1.3 grams/cc  
 Rotation axis is approximately parallel to the plane of the planets orbit.  
 
 
The basic properties of Neptune are:  
 Diameter 3.9 times that of Earth  
 Mass 17 times Earth  
 Density 1.5 grams/cc  
 Rotation axis at an angle approximately 30◦ to plane of orbit 
 

 
Like Jupiter and Saturn, Neptune and Uranus have atmospheres that are 99.9% Hydrogen and 
Helium. Because of their relatively low masses, calculations of the interior structure of Uranus and 
Neptune indicate that there should be no zone of liquid metallic hydrogen, but that there should 
still be substantial solid cores to the planets (around 10 times the mass of the earth or so.) Quite 
surprisingly given this expected lack of liquid metallic hydrogen, both planets do have global 
magnetic fields. This suggests that a mechanism different from that producing Jupiter and Saturn’s 
fields (one that is not currently well understood) generates the magnetic fields of Uranus and 
Neptune. Uranus radiates approximately the same amount of energy as it receives from the sun. 
On the other hand, Neptune radiates about twice as much as it receives. The reason for this 
difference is currently not well understood. People have suggested everything from differences in 
the insulation of the two planets interiors, to heating due to radioactive decay, to gravitational 
potential energy, to a giant impact. 
Minor Solar System Bodies 
Meteoroids, Meteors, and Meteorites 
Small pieces of rocky debris in space that have not yet fallen to Earth are known as meteoroids. 
The same bodies that fall to Earth but are burned up in Earth’s atmosphere are known as meteors, 
while those that survive to reach the ground are called meteorites. Radioactive dating of meteorites 
shows that most solidified from 4.4 to 4.5 billion years ago. Meteorites are found to have a number 
of distinct compositions:  
 Iron Meteorites are almost purely a mixture of Iron and Nickel.  

 Stony-Iron Meteorites have some Iron-Nickel material, mixed with some rocky material.  
 Stony Meteorites Can be divided into two categories.   
i. Primitive Stones, which show little modification since their initial cooling.  
ii. Differentiated Stones, which show signs of significant re-melting after their initial cooling. 
METEOROIDS 
 
METEORS 
 

METEORITE  
 
The irons, stony-irons, and differentiated stones represent material that underwent major chemical 
changes after their formation, while the primitive stones have not. Primitive stones represent 
relatively pristine samples of the material in the early solar system. 
The most reliable percentages of the different types of meteorites comes from meteorites that are 
found because their fall through the earth’s atmosphere was actually observed. These meteorites 
reveal the following percentages:  
 Primitive Stones: 87 % 
 Differentiated stones: 9 %  
 Iron: 3 %  
 Stony-Irons: 1 % 
Asteroids  
Rocky bodies somewhat larger than meteoroids are referred to as asteroids. Most known asteroids 
in the solar system orbit the sun in the asteroid belt, which lays between the orbits of Mars and 
Jupiter. The largest known asteroid is Ceres, which has a diameter of 0.3 times that of the Moon, 

although most asteroids are much smaller. The total mass in asteroid belt asteroids is only about 
1/2000 that of the earth. Asteroids can be classified into different families, based upon their orbits 
and compositions. Asteroids appear to be the most likely parent bodies for meteorites. 
 
 
 
Besides the main belt asteroids, there are two other orbit families of asteroids worth mentioni ng; 
Trojan point asteroids and Earth orbit crossing asteroids. 
 
 Trojan point asteroids: The Trojan points of Jupiter occur at the two points on Jupiter’s 
orbit leading and trailing Jupiter by 60 ◦. At the Trojan points, the perturbing effects of 
Jupiter’s and the Sun’s gravity essentially cancel, so that small bodies such as asteroids can 
orbit stably there. 
 
 Near Earth asteroids: Also known as Apollo or Aten asteroids, named after the prototypes 
of two different classes of Earth crossing asteroids. Because of the perturbing effects of the 
gravity of the inner planets, orbits in the inner solar system for asteroids over the long term 
aren’t stable. This means that in the long term there are two possible fates for such 
asteroids; the gravitational ejection of the body from the solar system, or a collision with 
one of the inner planets in the solar system. 
Comets  
Too many ancient civilizations, comets were harbingers of doom. In fact, up until the time of 
Tycho Brahe, it was a matter of scholarly debate as to whether comets were astronomical objects, 
or some sort of disturbance in the earth’s upper atmosphere. Tycho attempted to measure the 
distance to a comet by looking for an angular shift in the comet’s position as seen from different 
locations on the surface of the earth. Tycho’s inability to detect any such shift meant that the comet 

must be at a considerable distance from the earth, and thus must be a celestial object. The two 
comet reservoirs in the outer solar system are thought to be The Kuiper Belt and The Oort Cloud 
 
 
A Comet’s Structure  
There are two easily discernible parts to a comet’s structure:  
The Coma: The bright, fuzzy head of a comet is known as the coma, and is made up of dust and 
gas boiled from the surface of the comet by the Sun as the comet moves into the inner solar system.  
Tail: The tail of a comet is actually two tails:  
 The Plasma Tail : The bluish, straight tail is made up of ionized gases from the comet. 
Because the gas molecules are very light, they are easily blown away from the comet by 
the solar wind, forming a straight tail pointing directly away from the Sun. 

 The Dust Tail: The yellowish tail of the comet is known as the dust tail, and is made up 
of small dust grains liberated from the comet. Because the dust grains are heavier than the 
molecules in the plasma tail, the dust tail tends to curve under the combined effect of the 
Sun’s gravity and radiation pressure. 
The Outer Solar System 
The outer solar system is largely a mystery to us. the existence of comets suggests that there must 
be a large number of icy bodies orbiting the Sun beyond Neptune, but it has only been in the past 
fifteen years that objects (other than Pluto) have been detected. 
Pluto  
Because no spacecraft has ever visited Pluto, we know very little about th e planet. The basic 
properties of Pluto are:  
 Diameter 0.66 that of Moon.  
 Density 2.1 grams/cc.  
 
 
 
Pluto has a relatively eccentric orbit, and one that is tipped at an angle of about 17◦ to the ecliptic. 
In fact, Pluto’s orbit is sufficiently eccentric that  for a portion of its orbit, Pluto is actually closer 
to the Sun than Neptune. There is no chance of Pluto colliding with Neptune however, for two 
reasons. First, Pluto is in a 3 to 2 orbital resonance with Neptune; in this case the resonance is such 
that the two bodies never approach one another. Second, at the parts of its orbit where Pluto is at 
the same distance from the sun as Neptune, the large inclination of Pluto’s orbit insures that it is 

well above or below the plane of Neptune’s orbit. Pluto has a moon, named Charon, that was 
discovered in 1978, due to periodic eclipses of the planet by the moon, and vice-versa. Charon has 
a mass approximately 1/6 that of Pluto, which is a large mass for a satellite relative to the body it 
is orbiting. 
 
Kuiper Belt Objects 
Starting in 1992, significant numbers of Kuiper belt objects in orbits larger than that of Neptune 
have been discovered, thanks to very sensitive surveys that became possible due to the advances 
in electronic detectors at telescopes. There seem to be at least three distinct classes of such objects. 
1. Classical Kuiper Belt Objects  are in orbits that stay sufficiently far from Neptune that the 
planet is unable to make significant changes in their orbits e.g. Quaoar, discovered in 2002 
2. Scattered Kuiper Belt Objects are on fairly eccentric and inclined orbits, probably due to weak 
gravitational interactions with Neptune over times of billions of years e.g Sedna, discovered in 
2003 
3. Plutinos are in orbits that put them in the same 3 to 2 resonance  with Neptune that Pluto is in. 
(This means that it is probably reasonable to think of Pluto as simply the largest of this class of 
objects.) e.g. Orcus discovered in 2004 
 
 
FORMAT.ION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM 
The formation of the solar nebula is a critical initial step in the formation of the solar system and 
is thought to have begun with a large, diffuse cloud of gas and dust existing in a region of space 
where star formation was possible. This cloud, known as a molecular cloud or stellar nursery, 
was primarily composed of hydrogen and helium —the two lightest and most abundant elements 
in the universe—alongside traces of heavier elements and dust grains. These heavier elements were 
remnants from earlier stars that had gone through their life cycles, contributing to the rich, recycled 
material of which the next generation of stars and planets could form. 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Triggering Event: Supernova or Shockwave 
The molecular cloud likely remained stable for a long period until a nearby supernova 
explosion or another powerful shockwave event disturbed it. A supernova, the explosive death 
of a massive star, can release an enormous amount of energy, sending powerful  shockwaves 
across space. When such a shockwave passed through the cloud, it would have disturbed the 
delicate balance of forces, compressing certain regions of the cloud. This compression likely 
caused parts of the cloud to become denser and, as a result, gravitational forces within those 
dense regions began to overcome internal pressures that had previously kept the cloud in 
equilibrium. This initiated a process of gravitational collapse, where the denser regions pulled 
in surrounding gas and dust, forming a protostellar core. 
 Collapse and Conservation of Angular Momentum 
As the gas and dust were pulled inward, they naturally began to spin faster. This acceleration 
can be explained by the principle of conservation of angular momentum . Angular 
momentum is a  property of rotating systems, and as the cloud’s mass moved closer to the 
center, it increased its rotational speed —much like an ice skater pulling in their arms to spin 
faster. This rotational speed increase prevented the entire cloud from collapsing directly into a 
single point and instead forced it into a flattened, rotating disk shape with most of its material 
concentrated at the center. This disk is what we call the solar nebula. 

 
 
 
 Formation of the Central Protostar 
The densest part of the nebula at the  center continued to collapse under its own gravity, 
gathering mass and heating up as gravitational energy was converted into thermal energy. As 
this central core continued to grow in mass and temperature, it eventually reached the 
conditions necessary for nuclear fusion to ignite, marking the birth of the protostar that would 
become the Sun. The ignition of fusion in the Sun’s core created an outward pressure from 
radiation that balanced the inward pull of gravity, stabilizing the newly formed star. 
 Structure and Dynamics of the Solar Nebula 
As the Sun began to shine, its strong solar wind (a stream of charged particles) started blowing 
away the lighter gases and particles from the inner regions of the nebula, particularly in the 
regions closer to the Sun where temperatures were highest. This process helped clear out much 
of the gas and dust in these inner regions, while leaving behind solid materials like rock and 
metal that would later coalesce to form the inner, rocky planets. In the outer regions, where 
temperatures were low enough for volatile compounds like water, methane, and ammonia to 
freeze, icy and gaseous bodies could form, allowing for the development of the gas and ice 
giants. The disk around the protostar contained a diverse range of materials,  from small dust 
grains to larger planetesimals, and over time, gravitational interactions caused these particles 
to collide and merge into larger bodies, gradually evolving into the complex structure of 
planets, moons, and other bodies in the solar system. 

 Final Stages of Solar Nebula Evolution 
As the Sun matured, its solar wind intensified, effectively "blowing away" the remaining 
nebular gas and marking the end of the solar nebula phase. This process left behind a cleared-
out region, where planets and other bodies had formed or were in the final stages of formation. 
The structure we see today —with planets, asteroids, and comets orbiting a central star —
originated from this well -organized, rotating solar nebula. This early arrangement and the 
conservation of angular momentum explain why most planets orbit the Sun in a relatively flat 
plane and in the same direction of rotation. Thus, the formation of the solar nebula and the 
subsequent birth of the Sun laid the groundwork for the complex architecture of the solar 
system, with each step shaped by fundamental physical principles like gravity, angular 
momentum, and energy conservation. This model is supported by observations of young star 
systems with similar protoplanetary disks, giving us glimpses into process es still occurring 
throughout the universe today. 
 Gravitational Influence of Large Planets 
As the larger planets (especially the gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn) grew in size, their 
gravitational fields became strong enough to significantly affect the motion of nearby debris. 
Their gravity would either pull smaller objects into themselves or alter their orbits, often 
ejecting them from the solar system altogether. Jupiter, with its immense gravitational pull, 
played a particularly influential role in this clearing phase, acting almost like a "cosmic 
vacuum" by capturing or deflecting smaller b odies that might otherwise have continued 
orbiting in the solar system. 
 Accretion and Collision 
The remaining debris closer to the forming planets experienced frequent collisions, a process 
that gradually reduced the number of smaller bodies in the solar s ystem. Through accretion, 
these particles either merged with one another to form larger objects (like moons or small 
asteroids) or collided with existing protoplanets, contributing to their mass. This is how the 
terrestrial planets—Mercury, Venus, Earth, a nd Mars—continued to grow, as smaller bodies 
collided with them and were absorbed. 
 Formation of Stable Orbits 
Over time, these collisions and gravitational interactions led to a more stable orbital 
arrangement for the planets and other bodies in the solar system. Debris that was not ejected 
or captured eventually settled into stable, less -crowded orbits. The asteroid belt , located 
between Mars and Jupiter, is one example of remaining debris that could not fully accrete into 
a planet due to Jupiter’s gravitational influence. This belt contains countless small rocky bodies 
and represents material left over from the early solar system. 
 Role of the Sun’s Solar Wind 
The Sun, now a fully ignited star, began emitting a steady solar wind —a stream of charged 
particles flowing outward from its surface. This wind helped clear lighter gases and fine dust 
from the inner solar system, pushing them outward and aiding in the process of "sweeping" 
remaining materials into the more distant reaches of the solar system. The lighter materials that 
were not pulled into planets were either dispersed into interstellar space or incorporated into 
the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud, which contain icy bodies and comet-like objects orbiting far 
from the Sun. 
 Establishing the Modern Solar System Structure 
The result of this clearing process was a more orderly system, with the Sun at the center, the 
planets in stable orbits, and only a limited amount of remaining debris confined to certain 
regions, like the asteroid belt, the Kuiper Belt, and th e distant Oort Cloud. This structure 
minimized the number of objects that could pose collision risks to planets, contributing to the 
relative stability of the solar system's architecture that we observe today. 
 
 
 
 

